title: My experience with the HoloLens
date: 2015-10-26 18:23:01
tags:
---

I had the opportunity to go to one of [Microsoft's HoloLens demos](https://www.hololensevents.com/Auth/Login) today and I'm really excited that I got to try out this awesome piece of technology. You should know that my personal hype level for HoloLens was very high going in to this demo, so I was going in there with the intention of thoroughly loving the experience.

## The Demo

They ushered me into a mock living room where they told me I would be playing Project Xray, the "first untethered, mixed-reality first-person shooter." This game was demoed at [Build](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L3q8KVsVdIc), although I played a simplified version of it that did not involve any handheld controller. It took me a second to figure out how to put it on, but after you do it once this process should be extremely easy. The device itself was very lightweight and felt sturdily attached to my head, which was good because I would have to be dodging fireballs in a moment.

The game served its purpose to show off the technology, but was actually surprisingly fun to play as well. You start by spinning in a circle and scanning the room, which was pretty cool because you can see the HoloLens detecing the walls and laying down wireframe over them. After starting the game, a friendly robot-alien crash lands through the wall and tells you some hocus-pocus about how some bad aliens are coming and he had to combine with me so that I could kill them blah blah blah who cares lets shoot some aliens. He flies into you and now you have a reticle on your screen that implies you can shoot stuff now.

Then the aliens come. They might break through any of the walls, so using a combination of your hearing skills and your following-on-screen-arrows-that-point-exactly-where-to-look skills you have to find the cracks in the walls. A big tube eventually pops through and aliens fly/crawl out of it. Aiming at the aliens was extremely intuitive because you just have to look at them. The reticle follows your eye movement and you fire the trigger when it's on them. I worried about this being sort of weird for some reason, but while I was doing it I didn't even have to think about so that must be a good sign. Shooting at the aliens involved the "air tap" that you've seen on some of the other videos. People must have been having a hard time with this because they made me practice it like 10 times. It worked fine for me though (practice makes perfect), except for having to remember to put my hand out far enough in front of me that the cameras could pick it up once or twice. 

The aliens shoot stuff at you as well, all of which you have to avoid. This makes the game pretty exciting because you are ducking and stepping all over the room. I can imagine playing this in a larger room where you might get to hide behind stuff being pretty dang cool. Different types of aliens that do different attacks keep coming out of different walls at you, and eventually you get a powerup called "X-ray". Say "X-ray" and time slows down and you can see where the aliens are behind the walls. At least, that's what is supposed to happen, but I'm not sure that I ever actually got that to work. Maybe I wasn't polite enough or confident enough when asking HoloLens to turn X-ray on, or maybe the UI change just wasn't strong enough for me to notice. 

Eventually a boss alien comes out and you kick its butt and you see your score on one of the walls and that's it. The HoloLens team member made me feel all special by telling me I had a "good score", probably "third best all day". This feeling, of course, was ruined completely when I found out some other jerk in my group got 5000 more points than me. Jerk. 

They then let us sit down with some of the "Developer Experience" developers to ask questions. I had a lot of questions in my head to ask that I of course forgot all about when it came to the Q&A time. I was there at the end of the day, and it did honestly feel like at least a couple members of the three person team weren't that excited to answer our questions. 

## Reaction

In a lot of ways, it lived up to my high expectations and hopes. The device was extremely comfortable and lightweight. In fact, as soon as I got into the game I almost completely forgot I was wearing it. There was also no trouble figuring out where to focus like you might experience with the Occulus Rift. 

The holograms interacted very well with reality, not jumping around inappropriately or coming out of thin air instead of the wall. I got really sucked into the action and it really feels like stuff is crashing through the walls at you (with one caveat, see below).

I didn't get to try out a ton of gestures, but the "air tap" worked like a charm. This is one aspect that has me worried about the HoloLens, because controlling interfaces with gestures is sometimes intuitive on paper but then extremely difficult in practice. (I'm looking at you LeapMotion). The LeapMotion has incredible tracking of your hand movements, but without tactile feedback I would say LeapMotion is still very difficult to use for most things. Someone in my group asked about touching holograms to select them instead of relying on the "gaze" feature, to which one of the developers responded more-or-less by implying "How would you know that you touched it?" I think this is the right answer. I think the technology probably supports it, but without tactile feedback to let me know I've touched something I would rather select it through other means, so this is reassuring to me. As part of this discussion though he mentioned that if you were working in a hybrid app that utilized a traditional monitor as well as HoloLens it's possible to use your mouse. You just move your mouse to the edge of the screen and it pops out and keeps going--this idea is extremely attractive to me.

The game was very fun (for a demo) and easy to play. One aspect of video games the HoloLens actually might struggle with, however, is exploring new places. In a traditional first-person shooter I get to experience new worlds as I progress through the game. If all games are similar to Project X-Ray then at the end of the day you are still staring at your same 4 walls, even if there are some holograms poking out of them.

The HoloLens runs Windows 10, which means of course that it can run any Universal Windows App, but should theoretically also mean that it can run anything a normal Windows PC can. So, if I want to completely escape from my monitor and spread my Visual Studio, Chrome, and Spotify windows out across my wall as I'm developing then I think I should have the freedom to do that. They told me that's not how it works though :sad_face:. I kind of got the impression that they couldn't understand why you would want to run a non-Universal Windows App on the HoloLens. This left me feeling a little "meh", as the HoloLens really will be only as useful as the apps it supports, and could not completely replace your PC. 

The one (and really only) glaringly huge flaw in the HoloLens is the field-of-vision. It. Is. Small. Surprisingly small. The videos imply that you will have an entirely immersive experience, but the actual experience is very much hindered by the fact that the holograms only show up in a small square directly in front. You will only see objects that are directly in front of you.

Oddly enough, the demo seemed tailored to highlight this shortcoming. The very first instance of the game is your alien buddy crash landing somewhere in front you. He makes a wide path from your upper-left to your lower-right. If you don't know exactly where to look, then you'll miss part of his path. I scanned across and saw the trail of his path, which disappeared and reappeared. So, right away my first thought with the HoloLens is a let down about not being completely immersed. If he had just popped through the wall in a single spot, this thought would have been delayed until later when I may have had a chance to get into the zone a bit more.

Even later, though, the issue persists. The aliens pop out of the wall and fly a couple of feet to the left or right, as soon as this happens you can no longer see them. You have to physically turn your head to adjust the field-of-vision and center the alien in front of you, which causes you to lose sight of the hole in the wall. This means aliens might be almost right in front of you shooting at you but you would have no idea. The magical experience of HoloLens ultimately ends up being lost in the fact that everything is still happening in a small rectangular screen, the screen is just very close to your face.

To be fair, this is still a developer preview. It's a few steps above a prototype, but it is not the consumer version yet. I am 100% sure that Microsoft is aware of this criticism because when we brought it up to the developers, one of them got kind of defensive about it. "Well, did that break the experience?" Uhh, yes Vlad, it did actually break the experience because (1) I was constantly reminded that I am looking at everything through a screen and (2) I could not see all my enemies at one time. Doesn't mean it was not really cool, it just wasn't completely immersive like you imagine. This device is definitely good enough for people to start developing games with, but I think HoloLens will never be able to live up to developers' imaginations unless the field-of-vision is expanded.

Without much 3d experience, and without a HoloLens, I've been wondering how I can prepare to develop for it in the off chance that I get the opportunity to buy one next year and I convince the Mrs. that $3,000 is lame compared to the opportunity of being an early adopter. Based on my conversation with the developers, it seems that the answer is to just start developing stuff in Unity. You can write native apps for HoloLens, but they have done a lot of work to make using Unity be a good experience, so for 3D development that is the recommended solution. This is good news, because it is a tried and true platform that we can start developing on now. I'm sure converting a project to work on the HoloLens won't be entirely seamless but in theory it should not be too horrible.

My overall impression is that I'm still excited about HoloLens' potential. Concerns I had about the holograms not looking or behaving quite right were completely quenched. I'm a little bummed that I can't use HoloLens as my main PC, but the field-of-vision issue is now my only major concern. Hopefully, this is something that they can fix soon (although don't expect it to be fixed for the developer preview next year).

TL;DR:

* HoloLens was very cool
* The developer preview model is good enough to start developing apps on
* The field-of-vision is too small
* HoloLens runs Windows 10 but apparently does not run the full Windows 10 experience

